It was very late and everyone had left the cafe except an old man who sat in the shadow the leaves of the tree made against the electric light. In the day time the street was dusty, but at night the dew settled the dust and the old man liked to sit late because he was deaf and now at night it was quiet and he felt the difference. The two waiters inside the cafe knew that the old man was a little drunk, and while he was a good client they knew that if he became too drunk he would leave without paying, so they kept watch on him. 

"Last week he tried to commit suicide," one waiter said. 

"Why?" 

"He was in despair." 

"What about?" 

"Nothing." 

"How do you know it was nothing?" 

"He has plenty of money." 

They sat together at a table that was close against the wall near the door of the cafe and looked at the terrace where the tableswere all empty except where the old man sat in the shadow of the leaves of the tree that moved slightly in the wind. A girl and a soldier went by in the street. The street light shone on the brass number on his collar. The girl wore no head covering and hurried beside him. 

"The guard will pick him up," one waiter said. 

"What does it matter if he gets what he's after?" 

"He had better get off the street now. The guard will get him. They went by five minutes ago." 

The old man sitting in the shadow rapped on his saucer with his glass. The younger waiter went over to him. 

"What do you want?" 

The old man looked at him. "Another brandy," he said. 

"You'll be drunk," the waiter said. The old man looked at him. The waiter went away. 

"He'll stay all night," he said to his colleague. "I'm sleepy now. I never get into bed before three o'clock. He should have killed himself last week." 

The waiter took the brandy bottle and another saucer from the counter inside the cafe and marched out to the old man's table. He put down the saucer and poured the glass full of brandy. 

"You should have killed yourself last week," he said to the deaf man. The old man motioned with his finger. "A little more," hesaid. The waiter poured on into the glass so that the brandy slopped over and ran down the stem into the top saucer of the pile. "Thank you," the old man said. The waiter took the bottle back inside the cafe. He sat down at the table with his colleague again.

"He's drunk now," he said. 

"He's drunk every night." 

"What did he want to kill himself for?" 

"How should I know." 

"How did he do it?" 

"He hung himself with a rope." 

"Who cut him down?" 

"His niece." 

"Why did they do it?" 

"Fear for his soul." 

"How much money has he got?" "He's got plenty." 

"He must be eighty years old." 

"Anyway I should say he was eighty." 

"I wish he would go home. I never get to bed before three o'clock. What kind of hour is that to go to bed?" 

"He stays up because he likes it." 

"He's lonely. I'm not lonely. I have a wife waiting in bed for me."

"He had a wife once too." 

"A wife would be no good to him now." 

"You can't tell. He might be better with a wife." 

"His niece looks after him. You said she cut him down." 

"I know." "I wouldn't want to be that old. An old man is a nasty thing." 

"Not always. This old man is clean. He drinks without spilling. Even now, drunk. Look at him." 

"I don't want to look at him. I wish he would go home. He has no regard for those who must work." 

The old man looked from his glass across the square, then over at the waiters. 

"Another brandy," he said, pointing to his glass. The waiter who was in a hurry came over. 

"Finished," he said, speaking with that omission of syntax stupid people employ when talking to drunken people or foreigners. "No more tonight. Close now." 

"Another," said the old man. 

"No. Finished." The waiter wiped the edge of the table with a towel and shook his head. 

The old man stood up, slowly counted the saucers, took a leather coin purse from his pocket and paid for the drinks, leaving half a peseta tip. The waiter watched him go down the street, a very old man walking unsteadily but with dignity. 

"Why didn't you let him stay and drink?" the unhurried waiter asked. They were putting up the shutters. "It is not half-past two." 

"I want to go home to bed." 

"What is an hour?" 

"More to me than to him." 

"An hour is the same." 

"You talk like an old man yourself. He can buy a bottle and drink at home." 

"It's not the same." 

"No, it is not," agreed the waiter with a wife. He did not wish to be unjust. He was only in a hurry. 

"And you? You have no fear of going home before your usual hour?" 

"Are you trying to insult me?" 

"No, hombre, only to make a joke." 

"No," the waiter who was in a hurry said, rising from pulling down the metal shutters. "I have confidence. I am all confidence." 

"You have youth, confidence, and a job," the older waiter said. "You have everything." 

"And what do you lack?" 

"Everything but work." 

"You have everything I have." 

"No. I have never had confidence and I am not young." 

"Come on. Stop talking nonsense and lock up." 

"I am of those who like to stay late at the cafe," the older waiter said. 

"With all those who do not want to go to bed. With all those who need a light for the night." 

"I want to go home and into bed." 

"We are of two different kinds," the older waiter said. He was now dressed to go home. "It is not only a question of youth and confidence although those things are very beautiful. Each night I am reluctant to close up because there may be some one who needs the cafe." 

"Hombre, there are bodegas open all night long." 

"You do not understand. This is a clean and pleasant cafe. It is well lighted. The light is very good and also, now, there are shadows of the leaves." 

"Good night," said the younger waiter. 

"Good night," the other said. Turning off the electric light he continued the conversation with himself, It was the light of course but it is necessary that the place be clean and pleasant. You do not want music. Certainly you do not want music. Nor can you stand before a bar with dignity although that is all that is provided for these hours. What did he fear? It was not a fear or dread. It was a nothing that he knew too well. It was all a nothing and a man was a nothing too. It was only that and light was all it needed and a certain cleanness and order. Some lived in it and never felt it but he knew it all was nada y pues nada y nada y pues nada. Our nada who art in nada, nada be thy name thy kingdom nada thy will be nada in nada as it is in nada. Give us this nada our daily nada and nada us our nada as we nada our nadas and nada us not into nada but deliver us from nada; pues nada. Hail nothing full of nothing, nothing is with thee. He smiled and stood before a bar with a shining steam pressure coffee machine. 

"What's yours?" asked the barman. 

"Nada." 

"Otro loco mas," said the barman and turned away. 

"A little cup," said the waiter. 

The barman poured it for him. 

"The light is very bright and pleasant but the bar is unpolished," the waiter said. 

The barman looked at him but did not answer. It was too late at night for conversation. 

"You want another copita?" the barman asked. 

"No, thank you," said the waiter and went out. He disliked bars and bodegas. A clean, well-lighted cafe was a very different thing. Now, without thinking further, he would go home to his room. He would lie in the bed and finally, with daylight, he would go to sleep. After all, he said to himself, it's probably only insomnia. Many must have it.

At the lake shore there was another rowboat drawn up. The two Indians stood waiting.

Nick and his father got in the stern of the boat and the Indians shoved it off and one of them got in to row. Uncle George sat in the stern of the camp rowboat. The young Indian shoved the camp boat off and got in to row Uncle George.

The two boats started off in the dark. Nick heard the oarlocks of the other boat quite a way ahead of them in the mist. The Indians rowed with quick choppy strokes. Nick lay back with his father's arm around him. It was cold on the water. The Indian who was rowing them was working very hard, but the other boat moved further ahead in the mist all the time.

"Where are we going, Dad?" Nick asked.

"Over to the Indian camp. There is an Indian lady very sick."

"Oh," said Nick.

Across the bay they found the other boat beached. Uncle George was smoking a cigar in the dark. The young Indian pulled the boat way up on the beach. Uncle George gave both the Indians cigars.

They walked up from the beach through a meadow that was soaking wet with dew, following the young Indian who carried a lantern. Then they went into the woods and followed a trail that led to the logging road that ran back into the hills. It was much lighter on the logging road as the timber was cut away on both sides. The young Indian stopped and blew out his lantern and they all walled on along the road.

They came around a bend and a dog came out barking. Ahead were the lights of the shanties where the Indian bark-peelers lived. More dogs rushed out at them. The two Indians sent them back to the shanties. In the shanty nearest the road there was a light in the window. An old woman stood in the doorway holding a lamp.

Inside on a wooden bunk lay a young Indian woman. She had been trying to have her baby for two days. All the old women in the camp had been helping her. The men had moved off up the road to sit in the dark and smoke cut of range of the noise she made. She screamed just as Nick and the two Indians followed his father and Uncle George into the shanty. She lay in the lower bunk, very big under a quilt. Her head was turned to one side. In the upper bunk was her husband. He had cut his foot very badly with an ax three days before. He was smoking a pipe. The room smelled very bad.

Nick's father ordered some water to be put on the stove, and while it was heating he spoke to Nick.

"This lady is going to have a baby, Nick," he said.

"I know," said Nick.

"You don't know," said his father. "Listen to me. What she is going through is called being in labor. The baby wants to be born and she wants it to be born. All her muscles are trying to get the baby born. That is what is happening when she screams."

"I see," Nick said.

Just then the woman cried out.

"Oh, Daddy, can't you give her something to make her stop screaming?" asked Nick.

"No. I haven't any anaesthetic," his father said. "But her screams are not important. I don't hear them because they are not important."

The husband in the upper bunk rolled over against the wall.

The woman in the kitchen motioned to the doctor that the water was hot. Nick's father went into the kitchen and poured about half of the water out of the big kettle into a basin. Into the water left in the kettle he put several things he unwrapped from a handkerchief.

"Those must boil," he said, and began to scrub his hands in the basin of hot water with a cake of soap he had brought from the camp. Nick watched his father's hands scrubbing each other with the soap. While his father washed his hands very carefully and thoroughly, he talked.

"You see, Nick, babies are supposed to be born head first but sometimes they're not. When they're not they make a lot of trouble for everybody. Maybe I'll have to operate on this lady. We'll know in a little while."

When he was satisfied with his hands he went in and went to work.

"Pull back that quilt, will you, George?" he said. "I'd rather not touch it."

Later when he started to operate Uncle George and three Indian men held the woman still. She bit Uncle George on the arm and Uncle George said, "Damn squaw bitch!" and the young Indian who had rowed Uncle George over laughed at him. Nick held the basin for his father. It all took a long time.

His father picked the baby up and slapped it to make it breathe and handed it to the old woman.

"See, it's a boy, Nick," he said. "How do you like being an interne?"

Nick said. "All right." He was looking away so as not to see what his father was doing.

"There. That gets it," said his father and put something into the basin.

Nick didn't look at it.

"Now," his father said, "there's some stitches to put in. You can watch this or not, Nick, just as you like. I'm going to sew up the incision I made."

Nick did not watch. His curiosity had been gone for a long time.

His father finished and stood up. Uncle George and the three Indian men stood up. Nick put the basin out in the kitchen.

Uncle George looked at his arm. The young Indian smiled reminiscently.

"I'll put some peroxide on that, George," the doctor said.

He bent over the Indian woman. She was quiet now and her eyes were closed. She looked very pale. She did not know what had become of the baby or anything.

"I'll be back in the morning." the doctor said, standing up.

"The nurse should be here from St. Ignace by noon and she'll bring everything we need."

He was feeling exalted and talkative as football players are in the dressing room after a game.

"That's one for the medical journal, George," he said. "Doing a Caesarian with a jack-knife and sewing it up with nine-foot, tapered gut leaders."

Uncle George was standing against the wall, looking at his arm.

"Oh, you're a great man, all right," he said.

"Ought to have a look at the proud father. They're usually the worst sufferers in these little affairs," the doctor said. "I must say he took it all pretty quietly."

He pulled back the blanket from the Indian's head. His hand came away wet. He mounted on the dege of the lower bunk with the lamp in one hand and looked in. The Indian lay with his face toward the wall. His throat had been cut from ear to ear. The blood had flowed down into a pool where his body sagged the bunk. His head rested on his left arm. The open razor lay, edge up, in the blankets.

"Take Nick out of the shanty, George," the doctor said.

There was no need of that. Nick, standing in the door of the kitchen, had a good view of the upper bunk when his father, the lamp in one hand, tipped the Indian's head back.

It was just beginning to be daylight when they walked along the logging road back toward the lake.

"I'm terribly sorry I brought you along; Nickie," said his father, all his post-operative exhilaration gone. "It was an awful mess to put you through."

"Do ladies always have such a hard time having babies?" Nick asked.

"No, that was very, very exceptional."

"Why did he kill himself, Daddy?"

"I don't know, Nick. He couldn't stand things, I guess."

"Do many men kill themselves, Daddy?"

"Not very many, Nick."

"Do many women?"

"Hardly ever."

"Don't they ever?"

"Oh, yes. They do sometimes."

"Daddy?"

"Yes."

"Where did Uncle George go?"

"He'll turn up all right."

"Is dying hard, Daddy?"

"No, I think it's pretty easy, Nick. It all depends."

They were seated in the boat. Nick in the stern, his father rowing. The sun was coming up over the hills. A bass jumped, making a circle in the water. Nick trailed his hand in the water. It felt warm in the sharp chill of the morning.

In the early morning on the lake sitting in the stern of the boat with his father rowing; he felt quite sure that he would never die.




The Old Man and the Sea
He was an old man who fished alone in a skiff in the Gulf Stream and he had gone
eighty-four days now without taking a fish. In the first forty days a boy had been with him.
But after forty days without a fish the boy’s
parents had told him
that the old man was
now definitely and finally salao,
which is the worst form of
unlucky, and the boy had gone
at their orders in another boat
which caught three good fish the first week. It made the
boy sad to see the old man come
in each day with his skiff empty and he always went
down to help him carry either the coiled lines or the gaff and harpoon and the sail that
was furled around the mast. The sail was patched with flour
sacks and, furled, it looked
like the flag of permanent defeat.
The old man was thin and gaunt with deep
wrinkles in the back of his neck. The
brown blotches of the benevolent
skin cancer the sun brings from its reflection on the
tropic sea were on his cheeks. The blotches ran well down
the sides of his face and his
hands had the deep-creased scars from handling heavy fish on the
cords. But none of
these scars were fresh. They
were as old as erosions
in a fishless desert.
Everything about him
was old except his eyes and they
were the same color as the
sea and were cheerful and undefeated.
“Santiago,” the boy said to him as they climbed the bank from where the skiff was
hauled up. “I could go with you
again. We’ve made some money.”
The old man had taught the boy to
fish and the boy loved him.
“No,” the old man said. “You’re with
a lucky boat. Stay with them.”
“But remember how you went eighty-seven
days without fish and then we caught big
ones every day for three weeks.”

“I remember,” the old man said. “I know you did not leave me because you doubted.”
“It was papa made me leave. I am
a boy and I must obey him.”
“I know,” the old man said. “It is quite normal.”
“He hasn’t much faith.”
“No,” the old man said. “But we have. Haven’t we?”
“Yes,” the boy said. “Can I offer you a beer on the Terrace and then we’ll take the stuff
home.”
“Why not?” the old man said. “Between fishermen.”
They sat on the Terrace and many of the
fishermen made fun of the old man and he
was not angry. Others, of the
older fishermen, looked at him and were
sad. But they did
not show it and they spoke politely about
the current and the depths they had drifted
their lines at and the steady
good weather and of what
they had seen. The successful
fishermen of that day were already in and
had butchered their marlin out and carried
them laid full length across two
planks, with two men staggering at the end of each plank,
to the fish house where they
waited for the ice truck to carry them to the market in
Havana. Those who had caught sharks had taken them to the shark
factory on the other
side of the cove where they were hoisted on
a block and tackle, their
livers removed, their
fins cut off and their hides skinned out and
their flesh cut into strips for salting.
When the wind was in the east a smell
came across the harbour from the shark
factory; but today there was only the faint edge of the odour because the wind had
backed into the north and then dropped off and
it was pleasant and sunny on the Terrace.
“Santiago,” the boy said.
“Yes,” the old man said. He was holding his
glass and thinking of many years ago.
“Can I go out to get sardines for you for tomorrow?”
“No. Go and play baseball. I can still row and Rogelio will throw the net.”
“I would like to go. If I cannot fish with
you. I would like to serve in some way.”
“You bought me a beer,” the old man said. “You are already a man.”
“How old was I when you first took me in a boat?”
“Five and you nearly were killed when I brought the fish in too green and he nearly
tore the boat to pieces. Can you remember?”
“I can remember the tail slapping and
banging and the thwart
breaking and the
noise of the clubbing. I can remember you throwing me into the bow where the wet coiled
lines were and feeling the whole boat shiver
and the noise of you clubbing him like
chopping a tree down and the sweet blood smell all over me.”
“Can you really remember that
or did I just tell it to you?”

“I remember everything from when we first went together.”
The old man looked at him with his
sun-burned, confident loving eyes.
“If you were my boy I’d take you out and
gamble,” he said. “But
you are your father’s
and your mother’s and you are in a lucky boat.”
“May I get the sardines? I know where I can get four baits too.”
“I have mine left from today. I
put them in salt in the box.”
“Let me get four fresh ones.”
“One,” the old man said. His hope and his confidence had never gone. But now they
were freshening as when the breeze rises.
“Two,” the boy said.
“Two,” the old man agreed. “You didn’t steal them?”
“I would,” the boy said.
“But I bought these.”
“Thank you,” the old man said.
He was too simple to wonder when he had attained
humility. But he knew he had attained it
and he knew it was not disgraceful and it
carried no loss of true pride.
“Tomorrow is going to be a good day
with this current,” he said.
“Where are you going?” the boy asked.
“Far out to come in when the wind shifts.
I want to be out before it is light.”
“I’ll try to get him to work far out,” the
boy said. “Then if you hook something truly
big we can come to your aid.”
“He does not like to
work too far out.”
“No,” the boy said. “But I will see something that he
cannot see such as a bird
working and get
him to come out after dolphin.
” “Are his eyes that bad?” “He is almost blind.” “It is
strange,” the old man said. “He never went turtle-ing. That is what kills the eyes.” “But
you went turtle-ing for years off the Mosquito Coast and your eyes are good.”
“I am a strange old man”
“But are you strong enough
now for a truly big fish?”
“I think so. And there are many tricks.”
“Let us take the stuff home,” the boy
said. “So I can get the cast net and go after
the sardines.”
They picked up the gear from the boat. The old man carried the mast on his shoulder

“I’m not very hungry.”
“Come on and eat. You can’t fish and not eat.”
“I have,” the old man said getting up and
taking the newspaper and folding it. Then
he started to fold the blanket.
“Keep the blanket around you,” the boy said.
“You’ll not fish without eating while I’m
alive.”
“Then live a long time and take care of yourself,” the old man said. “What are we
eating?”
“Black beans and rice, fried bananas, and some stew.”
The boy had brought them in a two-decker metal container
from the Terrace.
The two sets of knives and forks and spoons
were in his pocket
with a paper napkin
wrapped around each set.
“Who gave this to you?”
“Martin. The owner.”
“I must thank him.”
“I thanked him already,” the boy said.
“You don’t need to thank him.”
“I’ll give him the belly meat of a big fish,”
the old man said. “Has he done this for us
more than once?”
“I think so.”
“I must give him something more than the belly meat then.
He is very thoughtful for
us.”
“He sent two beers.”
“I like the beer in cans best.”
“I know. But this is in bottles, Hatuey
beer, and I take back the bottles.”
“That’s very kind of you,” the
old man said. “Should we eat?”
“I’ve been asking you to,” the boy told him gently. “I have not wished to open the
container until you were ready.”
“I’m ready now,” the old man said. “I only needed time to wash.”
Where did you wash? the boy thought. The village water supply was two streets
down the road. I must have water here for
him, the boy thought, and soap and a good
towel. Why am I so thoughtless? I must get
him another shirt and a
jacket for the winter
and some sort of shoes and another blanket.

“Your stew is excellent,” the old man said.
“Tell me about the baseball,” the boy asked him.
“In the American League it is the Yankees as I said,” the old man said happily.”
“They lost today,” the boy told him.
“That means nothing. The great
DiMaggio is himself again.”
“They have other men on the team.”
“Naturally. But he makes the difference. In
the other league, between Brooklyn and
Philadelphia I must take Brooklyn. But then I think of Dick
Sisler and those great drives
In the old park.”
“There was nothing ever like them. He hits the longest ball I have ever seen.”
“Do you remember when he used to come to the Terrace?”
“I wanted to take him fishing but I was too timid
to ask him. Then I asked you to
ask him and you were too timid.
” “I know. It was a great mistake. He might have gone
with us. Then we would have that for all of
our lives.” “I would like to take the great
DiMaggio fishing,” the old man said. “They say
his father was a fisherman. Maybe he was
as poor as we are and would understand.” “The
great Sisler’s father was never poor and
he, the father, was playing in the Big Leagues when he was my age.” “When I was your
age I was before the mast on a square rigged ship that ran
to Africa and I
have seen lions on the beaches in the evening.”
“I know. You told me.”
“Should we talk about Africa or about baseball?”
“Baseball I think,” the boy said. “Tell me
about the great John
J. McGraw.” He said
Jota for J.
“He used to come to the Terrace sometimes too in the older days. But he was rough
and harsh-spoken and difficult when he was drinking. His mind was on horses as well as
baseball. At least he carried lists of horses at all times in his pocket and frequently
spoke the names of horses
on the telephone.”
“He was a great manager,” the boy said. “My
father thinks he was the greatest.”
“Because he came here the most times,” the old man said. “If Durocher had
continued to come here
each year your father would think him the greatest manager.”
“Who is the greatest
manager, really, Luque or Mike Gonzalez?”
“I think they are equal.”
“And the best fisherman is you.”

“No. I know others better.”
“Que Va,” the boy said. “The
re are many good fishermen and some great ones. But
there is only you.”
“Thank you. You make me happy. I hope no fish will come along so great that he will
prove us wrong.”
“There is no such fish if you
are still strong as you say.”
“I may not be as strong as I think,” the old man said. “But I know many tricks and I
have resolution.” “You ought to go to bed now so that you will be fresh in the morning. I
will take the things back to the Terrace.”
“Good night then. I will
wake you in the morning.”
“You’re my alarm clock,” the boy said.
“Age is my alarm clock,” the old man said. “Why do old men wake so
early? Is it to
have one longer day?”
“I don’t know,” the boy said. “All I know is
that young boys sleep late and hard.”
“I can remember it,” the old man
said. “I’ll waken you in time.”
“I do not like for him to waken me. It
is as though I were inferior.”
“I know.”
“Sleep well old man.”
The boy went out. They had eaten with no light on the ta
ble and the old man took off
his trousers and went to bed
in the dark. He rolled his trousers up to make a pillow,
putting the newspaper inside
them. He rolled himself in the blanket and slept on the
other old newspapers that covered the springs of the bed.
He was asleep in a short time and he dreamed of Africa when he was a boy and the
long golden beaches and the white beaches, so
white they hurt your
eyes, and the high
capes and the great brown mountains. He lived along that
coast now every night and in
his dreams he heard the surf roar and saw the native boats come riding through it.
He smelled the tar and oakum of
the deck as he slept and he
smelled the smell of Africa
that the land breeze brought at morning.
Usually when he smelled the land breeze he
woke up and dressed to go and wake the
boy. But tonight the smell of the land breeze
came very early and he knew it was too early
in his dream and went on dreaming to see the white peaks of the Is
lands rising from the
sea and then he dreamed of the different harbours and roadsteads of
the Canary Islands.
He no longer dreamed of storms, nor of
women, nor of great
occurrences, nor of
great fish, nor fights, nor contests of strength, nor
of his wife. He only dreamed of places
now and of the lions on the beach. They played
like young cats in the dusk and he loved
them as he loved the boy. He never dreamed about the boy. He simply woke, looked out
the open door at the moon
and unrolled his trousers and put them on.
